I used Opus 4.6 to build in 10 minutes
what it takes a Goldman analyst to build
in a day. I'm not a Goldman analyst. And
then I built a board deck for that in
just 20 more minutes. General
intelligence just showed up in Excel and
PowerPoint and its name is Claude. I
built a full operating model last week.
Revenue projections, cost structure,
unit economics, the works. And that just
took a few minutes. And after that,
Claude in PowerPoint took over and built
slides, executive summaries, financials,
key metrics using an actual slide deck
template. Just a few minutes later, I
had a presentation with charts
referencing live Excel data formatted in
the correct fonts and colors. And this
is something that would have taken a
couple of days just a few months ago.
And yes, I did mean it about Goldman. A
Goldman Sachs analyst looked at the
model and told me it was solid. It's the
kind of output that would have probably
taken him a day to build. and it took me
30 minutes total with a deck included.
This is the piece of the week's news
that most people are going to sleep on
because it doesn't have the drama of a
benchmark score. It doesn't have the
spectacle of 16 agents building a
compiler or an agent managing 50
developers. This is just Excel, right?
It's just PowerPoint. The tools nobody
thinks about twice. And yet, we spend
our days there. And as of this week,
effectively, they have general
intelligence inside them. The same
intelligence that built that C compiler,
the same intelligence that found 500
zeroday vulnerabilities on its own after
security researchers had passed the code
as secure. And here's the point that
should really stop you. It's not about a
single product release. I don't care if
you think Opus 4.6 is the sauce or not.
The point is that this ship into Excel
and PowerPoint paves the way 4.7 and
then 5.0. It's not that the applications
are going to change. PowerPoint will
look the same. Excel will look the same,
but the intelligence inside them is
going to compound. This is the dumbest
Excel and PowerPoint will ever be. Now,
I covered Opus 4.6 in a separate piece
earlier this week. What the model can
do, why it matters. I talked a lot about
agents. This is about what happens when
that intelligence shows up out
billion people use every single day and
why it turns Microsoft into just a dumb
pipe and what that means for how you
think about work when your tools are
getting smarter faster than you can
update your assumptions about them. So
what actually shipped? Two things
happened in the past couple of weeks and
taken together they represent something
bigger than either one of them by
themselves. On January 24th, Anthropic
opened Claude and Excel to pro
subscribers. Anyone paying 20 bucks a
month or more. The feature had been
limited beta. The feature had been in
limited beta since October of last year,
but the January release made it broadly
available. Then on February 5th,
alongside the Opus 4.6 6 launch, two
things happened at once. Claude and
Excel upgraded to 4.6, the same model
that powered all of those amazing coding
results. And Claude and PowerPoint
launched for the first time. The Excel
integration is not a chatbot bolted onto
the sidebar, even though it looks like
it. It actually operates directly
against your work. It reads your
existing data. It understands your tab
structures. It writes and debugs
formulas. It builds pivot tables. Yes,
it's absolutely not perfect. Yes, it
needs work sometimes and a check from an
experienced analyst, but I'm going to
keep reminding you this is the dumbest
that model is ever going to get in
Excel. The PowerPoint integration is
more interesting than most coverage
suggests. It doesn't just generate
slides. It reads your slide masters,
your layouts, your fonts, your color
schemes, your template, your colors,
your template, your font hierarchy. It
produces slides that don't look like AI
made them because they match the design
system your team already uses. And that
has been a huge breakthrough for AI in
the past month or two that most people
have slept on. Back in the fall of 2025,
building an AI PowerPoint meant you had
to give up your own templates. Not
anymore. The combination of Excel and
PowerPoint together matters more than
any of these tools by themselves.
Because both run on the same underlying
model, Claude is able to bring the same
intelligence to bear across both. and
claude produced Excel documents play
very nicely with claude produced
PowerPoints. So if you're building an
analysis in Excel and then you tell
Claude in PowerPoint to generate the
board deck off of that analysis, it's
going to be very easy to get from data
to decision in a single sitting. That's
the promise of working with Claude
seamlessly across a bunch of different
Microsoft artifacts. So how do you get
it? This is the part most of the
coverage skips. So let me be specific.
Claude and Excel is available now to
everybody on Claude's pro plan at 20
bucks a month. That's it. Very simple.
Same price as Netflix. Just install the
Claude desktop app, enable the Excel
integration, and it appears inside
Excel. Claude in PowerPoint is harder to
get right now. It launched on February
5th and is currently only available on
Max Plan, which is like a hundred bucks
a month. I think it's because you burn
more tokens on PowerPoint than Excel.
It's not yet out on Pro. And if you need
both tools and you're an individual, the
max plan is the only option you've got.
The pricing matters because of what it
implies about the cost of intelligence.
Junior financial analysts can cost, I
don't know, six figures, $100,000,
$120,000 fully loaded. An associate at a
consulting firm can build 300 to 500 an
hour. At that price, between 20 and 100
bucks a month for Claude and Excel and
PowerPoint, there are a lot of
organizations that are going to start
asking themselves if junior analysts are
adding incremental value. I'm not saying
the junior analyst role is obsolete. I'm
saying the junior analyst who only
builds models and decks manually has a
big big problem because that scarce
skill is no longer scarce and you're
going to start to get measured by how
quickly you can ramp on AI tooling and
expand your spam. Here's where it gets
really interesting because most people
comparing Claude and Excel to Microsoft
Copilot miss the point entirely. They're
stuck in formulas. They're stuck talking
about Microsoft native integrations,
etc. Pay attention. Anthropic partnered
with Moody's, the London Stock Exchange
Group, Thirdbridge, and others to build
financial data connectors directly into
the Claude ecosystem. These are not
generic web scrapers. their
authenticated structured data feeds from
platforms that institutional finance
runs on. Which means in practice, you
can ask Claude to build a comparable
company analysis and instead of manually
pulling data from a terminal, the model
will query live financial data through
those connectors and populate your
spreadsheet with real numbers. Anthropic
also ship pre-built financial skills,
purpose-built workflows for the tasks
that eat most of the analysts week,
comparable company analysis, discounted
cash flow models, due diligence, data
packs, etc. These aren't templates that
you fill in. They're intelligent
workflows that understand what a
discounted cash flow model actually
needs and how to structure the
assumptions tab to support them. For
anyone who has built a discounted cash
flow model from scratch, you know that
the mechanical work involved takes a
long time. Not because it's conceptually
difficult, but because there are
hundreds of cells that all need to
reference each other correctly.
Enthropic spied that pile of mechanical
work and realized with the right data
feeds and the intelligence of Claude,
they could knock that out and it would
just make the spreadsheet dumb plumbing.
And the intelligence is what would
matter. I do need to address the is this
real or is it a demo question heads on
because I get so many questions in the
comments after videos like this. Nate,
this is hype. Nate, you're overhyping
things again. I think the answer really
matters here. Enthropic announced a
Goldman Sachs partnership on February
6th, and that has already been ongoing
for months and months and months, while
Goldman essentially pioneered this
behind the scenes. Goldman is deploying
Claude across accounting and compliance
workflows now as a production tool. When
the most prestigious investment bank in
the world puts this in production for
internal ops, I think you know the demo
question got answered. AIG reported that
Claude made their document reviews five
times faster with accuracy improving
from 75% to over 90%. Not faster at the
expense of quality. Faster and more
accurate at the same time. The error
rate went down while the speed went up.
That was impossible in the 2010s era of
software and earlier. That is a
signature of a tool that does not get
tired, that does not skip the boring
rows, that does not assume the numbers
in the summary tab match without
checking. Meanwhile, the banks that
manages Norway's $1.7 trillion sovereign
wealth fund reported an estimated
$213,000
hours saved from Claude and Excel. This
is what it looks like when you target a
painoint that is scaled across a 1 and a
half billion user base in Microsoft. And
this is why Microsoft should be worried
because Claude's entire strategy
disintermediates Microsoft's influence
on their own user base in their own
tool. Let me walk through a few specific
workflows because not everybody's a
financial analyst and I want to give you
a sense of what general intelligence in
your tools actually looks like. Let's
start with an operating model. Let's say
you open a blank workbook and you have a
dream of a small business and you tell
Claude, "Please build me a three-year
operating model for my small business.
This is my revenue target. This is my
dream of how many people I want to hire.
This is how many customers I want to
get. This is the kind of product I have
and what I want to sell it for. I don't
know how to build a business operating
plan. I need your help. It turns out
Claude does a really, really good job at
that. It may not be perfect, but it gets
you about 90 95% of the way there out of
the gate. How about a board deck? Let's
say you've built the model and you want
Claude to build a PowerPoint you can
show your banker to get a small business
loan to get started. Claude can read the
Excel file you upload. It can understand
it because again, it's the same
intelligence underneath both. It can
generate the charts that reference
actual numbers. It can apply your
company's slide template and put out
something that you can go to a banker
with or you can go to an investor with.
Let's say you're a startup founder and
you're pitching a series B. You have
your financials in Excel and a pitch
template your designer built last
quarter. All you have to do is tell
Claude, "Hey, build a 12 slide pitch
deck from these financials. Here's where
we want to go. Here's the arc of the
story." Claude will just do it. It will
use your fonts, your colors, your layout
grid. And by the way, that is all new
since last fall. The last time I talked
about Excel, I had to be like, "It's
amazing. It does PowerPoint, but one,
it's not in PowerPoint, and two, good
luck using your own templates and
layouts." Not anymore. Not anymore.
That's how fast things move. What about
due diligence? Let's say you're trying
to understand a small business you want
to buy. So, you upload 3 years of
financial statements, and you tell
Claude, "Please build me a due diligence
data pack and flag anything unusual."
Claude saves you dozens of hours combing
through those financial statements and
greatly increases the probability you're
going to see something that might be a
red flag that might stop that
acquisition and save you a business
deal. Let's say you're a product manager
and you want to do comparable company or
comparable product analysis. You name a
few companies that are competitors and
Claude can pull all of the relevant
trading data, but also the product data
and actually build you a competitor
spreadsheet analysis from scratch in
just a few minutes. What about a
quarterly business review? Your
department heads submit their numbers in
separate spreadsheets. You consolidate
it all in Excel. You can tell Claude and
PowerPoint, "Please build me the QBR
deck with 15 slides using our corporate
template using these numbers." Done.
Now, all of these are finance workflows,
but there are non- finance workflows
that are just as important. I want to
call out. What about a strategy
analysis? You have a spreadsheet of 50
competitors with market positioning and
recent funding routes. You want to
understand how to score each competitor
on six different dimensions and weight
by strategic priorities. You just give
it to Claude in Excel and it can do it.
You give it to Claude in PowerPoint
after that and it can build a
competitive landscape deck with a
positioning matrix, a threat assessment
by segment, recommended strategic
responses. What about sales enablement?
Your sales team sends the same 10 slide
pitch to every prospect. Why not
handclaw the company's CRM data and
their last three earnings transcripts
and tell it to customize the pitch for a
CFO audience at a mid-market
manufacturing company? That is trivial
to do. Now, what about HR and people
analytics? You export 12 months of
employee survey data, 2,000 responses,
free form text, like art scales, eight
departments. You tell cloud in Excel,
hey, analyze the sentiment by
department, identify the three strongest
predictors of attrition risk, and build
a summary dashboard. It'll do it. What
about program management? You have a
master tracker in Excel with 200 line
items across a dozen work streams.
Owners, deadline, status, dependencies.
Claude can oneshot a program status deck
for the steering committee. What about
the formula and data work that nobody
likes to talk about before you even get
to the headline workflows? There's just
the daily grind that cla and Excel can
eliminate. Debugging a VLOOKUP chain
that breaks when someone sorts a column.
Writing a Power Query transformation to
clean vendor data. building conditional
formatting rules, tracing a circular
reference across four tabs. This is the
kind of work that eats hours a day when
you live in spreadsheets. And it's just
and it's the first thing Claude handles
and the thing that frees up the most
time before you even start the big
workflows. Every one of these workflows
exists today, not next quarter, not as a
wait list, right now. And here's what
none of the individual workflows make
obvious enough. The time savings alone
aren't the thing that adds up. The time
savings don't just add up, they
multiply. Having Claude in Excel saves
you time on modeling. Having Claude in
PowerPoint saves you time on deck.
Having both can save you twice the time
because it eliminates an entire category
of work that existed solely because the
tools could not understand what each
other built in the age before shared
intelligence. Think about what actually
eats your week. It's not just building
the model. It's not just building the
deck. It's the mental work that comes
from the translation layer in between.
You finish the analysis in Excel. Then
you open PowerPoint. You have to start
thinking and reexplaining the same data.
You have to start trying to think about
how it changes when you position it in a
deck form versus a spreadsheet form.
That translation cost is where most
knowledge workers spend the majority of
our production hours. It's not
necessarily even thinking, right? It's
translating into a different format for
a different audience. When one
intelligence spans both tools, that
translation cost starts to drop towards
zero. Claude doesn't just export the
data from Excel and import it to
PowerPoint. It deeply understands the
data in Excel because the same
intelligence built it and it carries
that understanding without you having to
mess with it directly into the
presentation. The chart it builds in
PowerPoint reflects an understanding of
what the model extracted from the
analysis. The narrative on the slide
reflects a deeper interpretation that
the model formed when building the Excel
spreadsheet. Context flows more easily
because the same model is building both.
Now, I'm not saying that there's a
direct export to PowerPoint from Excel
today, but I would bet you a lunch that
is coming in the next couple months. And
in the meantime, having that ability to
have a model understand how both Excel
and PowerPoint works and easily
translate context between them is a
godsend. What we're talking about here
is the context layer that is the future
of work and it's going to be enormous.
It's not really about the application
layer anymore. Microsoft owns that. It's
not even necessarily about the data
layer. Your databases own that. The
context layer sits between them. It's
the AI's accumulated understanding of
your data, your brand, your audience,
your goals. Every time the model touches
a new tool, the context layer is going
to get a little bit richer. Every time
it sees how your board deck differs from
your team Slack update, it's going to
learn something about how your org
translates information for different
audiences. Applications are containers.
The data is raw material. The context
layer is what Anthropic is making a play
for here. It's the intelligence that
understands what the data means and how
to express it for different audiences in
different formats. That is where the
value is accumulating and that is what
Enthropic is laser focused on with
claude in Excel and Claude in
PowerPoint. And unlike the application
layer which Microsoft has owned for
decades and which barely changes year
after year, no matter what they say, the
context layer improves automatically
with every single model upgrade and
every new tool integration. It's the
fastest compounding asset in your tech
stack and most organizations don't even
know it exists. And that's what
separates what happened this week from a
normal product launch because on Tuesday
night, the night before Opus 4.6 launch,
Claude and Excel ran on Opus 4.5, a
strong model, capable, useful, and on
Wednesday morning, it ran on Opus 4.6.
Nobody installed anything. Nobody
downloaded a patch. Nobody sat through a
migration wizard. The spreadsheet looked
the same, but it suddenly had x more
context and dramatically better
reasoning and the ability to hold an
entire multi-tab model in working memory
and understand how every cell relates to
every other cell. Think about what that
means for the next upgrade. Opus 4.7 is
coming. So is 5.0. Each time a new model
ships, every claw powered Excel and
PowerPoint on Earth gets smarter
overnight without you doing anything.
The operating model that took 10 minutes
with Opus 4.6 six might take five with
4.7 and be 99% right, not 95. The pitch
deck that needed 20 minutes of back and
forth with 4.6 might need 5 minutes with
5.0. The quality of reasoning continues
to improve. The depth of analysis
deepens. The output moves closer to
perfect. And it's not because you
learned a new tool. It's because the
tool learned on its own and got better.
This is a fundamentally different
upgrade cycle from anything the software
industry has produced. Microsoft ships a
new version of Office every few years.
Feature updates land quarterly. The pace
of improvement is set by the software
company's release schedule, its
engineering priorities, its QA cycle.
The pace of improvement is actually set
by Anthropic's insanely fast pace of
model releases. And those are happening
every couple of months with capability
jumps that would be measured in years by
traditional software standards. That
3mon gap between 4.5 and 4.6
context expansion. 5xed in just 3
months. What's 4.7 going to bring?
Almost certainly your mental model of
what AI tools can do is now behind
reality. It is hard to keep up with how
fast reality is moving right now. The
task that Claude maybe couldn't handle
last month in Excel, maybe it handles it
now. The presentation quality that
wasn't sufficient in January because it
didn't match your templates, maybe it
works now. And by April, both will have
improved again. The assumption is that
you learn your tools once and they stay
the same. That the thing you tested last
quarter is the same thing that's running
today. That assumption is dead. Your
tools are getting smarter faster than
you're updating your expectations of
them. And the practical consequence is
that you're going to need to re-evaluate
your workflows continuously. Not
annually, not when someone sends you a
blog post all the time. because the
boundary between the tasks I do myself
and the tasks that it is smart to
delegate to AI just keeps moving and
it's moving in one direction and it's
moving real fast. I can hear the
Microsofties in the comments saying,
"Doesn't Microsoft Copilot already do
this?" Well, the answer is sort of and
the real answer leads somewhere more
important than a feature comparison.
Pilot's advantage of course is a native
integration. It's built into Microsoft
365 from the ground up. The UI is
seamless. It understands the Office
ecosystem in a way a third party tool
doesn't. If your org lives within
Microsoft, C-pilot is the path of least
resistance and sometimes it's sold that
way. Claude's advantages of course are
reasoning depth, local file support,
financial data connectors. Claude wins
on the tasks that require genuine
reasoning over complex multi-step
problems like debugging a formula chain
across 12 tabs or structuring an
analysis that requires judgment about
what matters. And the local file setup
matters a lot as well. C-pilot will
require one drive for most of its
functionality, which means your files
live in the Microsoft cloud. Of course,
it's a Microsoft play. For orgs handling
sensitive financial data, it's kind of
nice to not have to do that with claude.
But in the end, the co-pilot comparison
is the wrong frame for what's actually
going on. I think the real story is more
structural than that. In September of
2025, Microsoft added Claude models to
its co-pilot. Yes, that's right. There's
Claude in co-pilot, too. So Microsoft,
the company that invested $13 billion in
OpenAI, built C-pilot on OpenAI's models
originally, now hedged by putting a
competitor's brain, quote unquote,
inside its own product. When the company
that owns the application layer starts
offering someone else's intelligence
inside it, it tells you where the value
is migrating. Microsoft really is
becoming a dumb pipe. It's not
overnight. It's not completely, but the
pattern is unmistakable and it mirrors
what is happening to every platform that
is getting caught between a
commoditizing interface and a rapidly
improving capability layer. AT&T built
the network. Then the network became a
pipe for Google and Netflix. The value
migrated from the carrier to the
service. Browsers were supposed to be
the platform and then they became
rendering engines for web applications.
Value migrated from the container to
what ran inside it. Excel is a grid of
cells. has been essentially the same for
20 years. New features are at the
margins. It's the same fundamental tool.
PowerPoint is just a canvas for slides.
Same story. The intelligence layer is
what is compounding. The application
layer is frozen. And that is why
Microsoft is hedging by offering every
major AI model inside its own products.
That's exactly what a dump pipe does. It
carries whatever traffic flows through
it. The implication for your
organization is to stop thinking about
your tool choice quite as much and start
thinking about your intelligence choice.
The question is not should we use Excel
or Google Sheets. It's which AI model
powers our spreadsheet and is it the
best one for the work that we do and our
workflows. You need to start thinking of
applications as containers and asking
about where the intelligence is coming
from and whether the intelligence has
the value you're looking for. This is
the thing that we aren't talking about
enough. If the cost of producing these
artifacts is collapsing towards zero
extremely rapidly, what happens when
these artifacts are free? So much of our
traditional human-drived software model
starts to break apart. Consulting
breaks. Not because consultants are
unnecessary, but because the business
model depends on a very large time
component that is about to disappear.
When a deliverable that build at 40
hours of associate time could be
produced in 40 minutes, that whole model
isn't going to work anymore. The correct
response here is not panic. It's
recognizing what becomes valuable when
artifacts go to zero. Analysis is
becoming a commodity. Judgment is
becoming very, very valuable. Knowing
how to build a discounted cash flow
sheet, well, Claude can do that. knowing
which assumptions you want to stress
test, which scenarios to run, what
stories the numbers are telling, and how
to read the clawed spreadsheet and find
the mistakes. There's judgment there,
and judgment is what clients are going
to pay for and boards are going to need.
The people who thrive in this
environment are not the ones who will
build the best artifacts with AI.
They're the ones who know which
questions to ask before whatever the
model is building gets gets built.
They're the ones who can look at a
completed analysis and say, you know,
this is technically right, but the whole
question is wrong. It's framed wrong.
That's value. That's where human value
is going. They're the ones who
understand the business well enough to
know which of the 17 possible analyses
Claude produced is the one that should
actually drive the decision. This is the
strategic skill I keep coming back to.
When production is free, economic
returns flow to people who know what's
worth making. Not necessarily more of,
not necessarily better of, not even
faster, because the 10-minute operating
model is worthless if you're modeling
the wrong thing. The 30 minute board
deck I talked about is worthless if it
tells a story that doesn't match reality
and doesn't line up with investor
expectations. Sometimes reality and
investor expectations don't line up, but
that's a different story. The tool will
make you faster. Only you can make sure
it's right. And there's an uncomfortable
truth here that is hiding inside all of
this. capability and that is a tidal
wave of slop. Every tool that makes it
easy to produce excellent work makes it
super easy to produce garbage and we are
about to drown in AI generated garbage
that looks professional. Researchers
have started calling it work slop and
it's true. It's AI generated
professional content that looks
technically competent and is completely
hollow. The estimated productivity cost,
by the way, $186 per employee per month
in time wasted processing work. That
sounds like it means something and says
nothing. That adds up and I bet it's
underelling. This isn't really about an
AI adoption problem. It's not about
whether you rethink your workflow or
just bolt AI onto the old workflow. This
is a fundamentally different problem.
This is about whether you have the
judgment to know which work should exist
and whether you work on a team that
displays that judgment as well. The same
capability that lets a thoughtful
strategist produce a day's work in 10
minutes lets a careless operator produce
a week's worth of polished nothing in an
afternoon. The tool will never know the
difference because you are the one that
maps what is needed onto the business
context and what the market requires.
And that's on you. In this sense, taste,
which gets talked about a lot, it's not
an aesthetic preference. It's not
something that is impossible to learn.
It's just the ability to distinguish
between output that serves a really
interesting human purpose that matters
and output that just exists. It's
knowing that a 40 slide deck that Opus
can create may look impressive, but it's
not as valuable as the 10 slide deck.
It's knowing the third scenario in the
model is what the board needs to see,
not the other two. It's knowing when the
analysis is done,
you shouldn't add more data because
that's just going to dilute things.
Organizations that have people with good
judgment are about to massively
outexecute the same organizations with
the same tools in the same industry that
don't have people with good judgment.
Good judgment is about to supercharge
economic activity for organizations that
understand how to deploy it. I want to
leave you with the implication that I
think matters the most. For 30 years or
more, professional value has been built
on execution skills. Can you build the
model? Can you write the code? Can you
design the spreadsheet? Can you
structure the analysis? Those execution
skills created our whole modern
knowledge economy. They're what
universities teach. They're what hiring
managers were taught to screen for. That
execution premium is just evaporating
now. Not in five years. Now, the
10-minute operating model isn't a
preview of a future. It's a product you
could buy today. But what is not
evaporating is the thinking that sits
above the execution layer. We have to
move up a level of abstraction in our
work as knowledge workers all of us. Now
it's the ability to frame the right
question. It's the strategic awareness
to know which analysis matters because
the tools are going to keep getting
better. The thinking is the place that
has to have the value. Claude can build
the vehicle for your thinking, but
Claude cannot replace human judgment.
And in that sense, I think Anthropic has
done a great job calling out Claude as a
tool for human thinking, similar to a
chalkboard or a notebook. That's the
right frame. And I think that's a very
compelling frame for professionals who
are looking to elevate our art in the
age of AI. We got to do better because
the AI is coming for the traditional
execution skills that define knowledge
management. And so my challenge to you,
if you haven't tried Claude in Excel, if
you haven't tried Claude in PowerPoint,
give it a try. But more importantly, and
yes, I have tons of guides on that in
Substack, I wrote up a whole guide just
for that for today. It's going to be
great, but I don't care about that. The
point is that you need to try it and you
need to understand that it is your
ability to frame problems. It is your
ability to decide what is good that is
going to distinguish your value long
term. All of that stuff that you were
proud of around execution that's going
to go the way of the dodo. The models
are going to keep getting better. What
was 95% good will be solved by the
middle of the year. It's your ability to
say this is the right direction to go in
that is going to make or break your
career in 2026 and 2027. Good luck and
have fun in Excel. It's a lot less
painful now than it was 10 years ago.
And yes, it really is true. PowerPoint
can now work with your company's
templates. One of the biggest wins of
2026, I think. All right. Have fun,
guys.